
   Contents

        * 1 Mandriva Linux 2010 Spring Release Notes
        * 2 Introduction
        * 3 Editions
             + 3.1 One Edition
             + 3.2 Powerpack Edition
             + 3.3 Free Edition
        * 4 Deprecation
        * 5 Installation media
             + 5.1 Available media
        * 6 Upgrading
             + 6.1 Upgrading from previous releases
             + 6.2 General Upgrading Steps
                  o 6.2.1 Upgrade using the GUI, mdkonline
                  o 6.2.2 Upgrade using the CLI, urpmi
                  o 6.2.3 Advanced upgrade options
        * 7 Major features
             + 7.1 Mandriva tools
                  o 7.1.1 Guest account
                  o 7.1.2 KA method / Installer
                  o 7.1.3 Diskdrake / Installer
                  o 7.1.4 Media management
                  o 7.1.5 Bootloader
                  o 7.1.6 msecgui
                  o 7.1.7 drakguard
                  o 7.1.8 netprofile
                  o 7.1.9 Mandriva Directory Server
             + 7.2 Desktop environments
                  o 7.2.1 GNOME
                  o 7.2.2 KDE
                  o 7.2.3 Desktop applications
                  o 7.2.4 Educational and scientific applications
             + 7.3 X server
             + 7.4 Base system
             + 7.5 System administration
             + 7.6 Internationalization

Mandriva Linux 2010 Spring Release Notes

Introduction

   This page contains important information the Mandriva Linux (2010.1)
   release, code name Farman.

   The following topics are covered:
     * General information about new features and major changes.
     * Changes to the Mandriva installer and upgrade instructions for
       users of previous releases.
     * Changes to supported hardware and drivers.
     * Changes regarding software packages.
     * Other technical information for experienced users.

   Please also refer to Mandriva Linux 2010 Spring Errata - the Errata for
   the 2010 Spring release. The Errata page contains information on known
   bugs and problems in the release and instructions on fixing, avoiding
   or working around them.

   For a more detailed and graphical introduction to the most obvious
   user-visible changes in this release, please see the Release Tour.

Editions

   Mandriva Linux 2010 Spring is available in several different editions,
   listed below.

One Edition

   The One edition is an installable live CD integrating the latest
   proprietary drivers, available free of charge. Six different versions
   of the One edition are available: two for GNOME and four for KDE, each
   with a different set of supported languages.
     * Starting from Mandriva 2010 Spring, now you are able to install
       Mandriva One directly from the boot menu, choosing the option
       'Install to Hard Disk', no need to run into a live session if you
       want so.

Powerpack Edition

   The Powerpack edition includes support, services, a wider range of
   packages, third-party proprietary applications, a subset of the Fluendo
   multimedia codec pack, providing support for MP3, WMA and WMV files and
   Fluendo DVD player.

Free Edition

   The Free edition is a pure free / open source software edition, without
   any of the non-free packages bundled with the other editions, available
   as a free download.

   For more information on the various editions, see Choosing the right
   edition.

   Additional information is also available online:
     * List of Compatible/Certified Computers and the detailed Mandriva
       Hardware Database
     * The Mandriva User Forums
     * The Mandriva Wiki

Deprecation

Installation media

Available media

   This release is available:
     * As a Free edition for the x86-32 and x86-64 architectures, on one
       DVD each, with a traditional installer.
     * As a Free edition for the x86-32 and x86-64 architectures, both on
       one single "dual" CD with a traditional installer.
     * As One live-CD (x86-32 architecture only), for GNOME and KDE
       editions, available for various languages. 4 different One editions
       are available, 2 for GNOME and 4 for KDE.

Upgrading

Upgrading from previous releases

   Please note!
   If you upgrade from a previous releases, KDE 3 - if installed - will be
   replaced by KDE 4. The old .kde directory in the user's /home will be
   backed up.

   Upgrading between releases always has the potential to cause some
   problems. Upgrading is supported and we do test upgrades, but due to
   the huge range of packages and hardware configurations possible, it is
   always the case that in your particular situation, the upgrade may
   cause a problem we did not anticipate. Therefore we recommend that you
   always back up your system prior to upgrading.

   If you tested one of the Mandriva Linux 2010 pre-releases (beta or RC),
   we advise you to remove all package sources and add them back using the
   Mandriva Control Center > Software Management >
   Configure media sources for install and update to be sure you have
   stable release media sources.

General Upgrading Steps

   After taking the necessary precautions pointed out above, you can
   upgrade using the Free or Powerpack editions respective DVD's, and it
   should work well. You can also upgrade in-line. What that means is that
   the Mandriva update notification applet, Mandriva Online, will notify
   you that a new Mandriva Linux release (2010.1) is available, and ask if
   you wish to upgrade. If you agree, the upgrade will be carried out from
   within your running system, just like a regular system update. You
   should then be able to reboot into a working 2010.1 system. If you have
   disabled the applet or it is not automatically running for some reason,
   you can upgrade manually either using the GUI or the CLI. Both methods
   are outlined below.

Upgrade using the GUI, mdkonline

   First make sure you have the latest updates for your currently running
   release prior to upgrading. To upgrade run this command as root in
   terminal:

          su
          mdkapplet-upgrade-helper --new_distro_version=2010.1

Upgrade using the CLI, urpmi

   You can also upgrade using urpmi in terminal. Below are the steps you
   need to follow:
     * First ensure your system is entirely up-to-date with the latest
       updates (when upgrading it's assumed you have the latest updates
       available for your installed release, so for a smoother upgrade
       always make sure you have the latest updates) using this command as
       root in terminal:

          su
          urpmi --auto-update -v

     * Remove your existing repositories, either using:
          + The Mandriva Control Center > Software
            Management > Configure media sources for install and update OR
          + Using this command as root:

                su
                urpmi.removemedia -av

     * Add 2010.1 repositories. To do this, use Easy URPMI. Set the
       Version field to 2010.1 also make sure the Architecture field is
       set correctly then click Add official medias. Next open the file it
       offers you with the default handler (gurpmi aka Software
       Installer).

     * To start the upgrade process, run the following command, as root:

          su
          urpmi --auto --auto-update --replacefiles 2>&1 | tee upgrade.log

   This will save the output of the process to the file upgrade.log in the
   current directory, in case you need to check it later, or you have any
   problems. Once the process completes (without errors), you should
   reboot, and you should find the system has been fully updated to
   2010.1.
   Caution !
   If you get any errors you should try and fix them before you reboot so
   as not to end up with a broken system e.g. without a graphical desktop
   (text console, aka tty, always works and can be used to fix most
   problems but is not as easy to use as a graphical desktop).

Advanced upgrade options

     * You can add --download-all to the above command when upgrading,
       this a brand new option in urpmi and will make it download all the
       packages first before trying to install them, this is useful in the
       case of internet connection failure during the upgrade process,
       since you can just relaunch the command and continue the process.
       Be aware though that this will requires quite some free space on
       the root / partition. Notice that urpmi displays info about the
       total size of the packages it's going to download, 10GB would
       usually be enough, but that depends on how many packages you have
       installed. You can also specify a location to download the rpms, in
       case the / partition is full and you have more free space say in
       your /home, you can do this using:

          urpmi -v --auto-update --download-all /path/to/download/folder

     * However note that --download-all /path/to/download/folder won't
       work for upgrading from releases older than 2010.0, until you
       update urpmi as older urpmi versions will consider
       /path/to/download/folder a package name, and no package names are
       allowed on the same command line with --auto-select or
       --auto-update. Working around this is simple, when upgrading, urpmi
       will first update itself along with some other core packages,
       glibc, perl, rpm... ect. So first use:

          urpmi -v --auto-update to update urpmi and the other packages
          mentioned above. After these packages are updated you'll be
          asked again for the rest of the packages, press Ctrl+C to cancel
          then relaunch it:
          urpmi -v --auto-update --download-all /path/to/download/folder

     * Another option, --noclean, will make urpmi not delete the rpms it
       downloads, you can then copy the rpms to another machine and use
       them when upgrading.

Major features

Mandriva tools

Guest account

   Many improvements in guest account management: use of restricted shell,
   restricted access to other user's files, prevent access for most of
   Mandriva administration tools...

KA method / Installer

   There is a new method to install a Mandriva System: duplicate an
   already installed one using a clone tool called KA. This is an
   experimental tool taken from an old research project named CLIC,
   (cluster product). The cloning process is able to duplicate nodes with
   different kinds of hardware (network, hdd, sound card etc...), and
   automatically regenerate his modprobe.conf. The cloning process erase
   all data on client nodes, so it should be used with care. A full
   documentation in PDF and HTML is available in the drakx trunk installer
   subversion repository. ka documentation.

Diskdrake / Installer

   File system encryption has been improved and made easier both in
   diskdrake and installer. "Encrypted" is no longer listed as a
   Filesystem, but as a checkbox in the creation window. This allows to
   specify a filesystem to use inside the encrypted partition, while it
   used to be forced to be ext3/ext4. Another change is that there will be
   no longer a "dmcrypt" tab listing on the encrypted partitions from
   various disks. Instead they are displayed in-place, identified also by
   a lock icon. Passphrase will be asked at boot time.

   As a reminder /boot can not be encrypted, so you need to have a
   separate unencrypted /boot if you decide to encrypt the root partition
   /.

   As a side effect, cryptoloop support, which is obsolete, has been
   completely removed.

Media management

     * New tag "media_type" has been added in media.cfg. One of the first
       application is to be able to manage easily media. Non-Free media
       will not be added anymore on Free installation. More
       functionnalities coming.

     * In the Free Edition the Non-free media sources are disabled by
       default, this is to comply with the idea that the Free Edition, DVD
       and free-dual CD, only contain free-open-source-software, when
       setting up the online media sources in Free Edition installs, the
       Non-free media sources are added, but disabled/ignored by default.
       For more information see Bug #40033.

     *
          + You can easily enable the Non-free media sources from the
            Mandriva Control Center > Software
            Management > Configure media sources for install and update.
            Basically you'd need to enable the Non-free and Non-free
            Updates repositories.

Bootloader

   Mandriva configuration utilities now support setting up an encrypted
   password in GRUB.

msecgui

     * A security summary GUI is now available.
     * Added ACLs support (Thanks to Tiago Marques from Caixa Magica).
     * It is now possible to run each periodic test and visualize test
       results using graphical interface.
     * Support for different periodicity for each periodic check (e.g.,
       checks could be run on daily, weekly or monthly base).
     * Support for task-oriented security levels, providing optimized
       configurations for desktops, netbooks, local and Internet servers,
       among others.

drakguard

     * Applications blocker: you can now decide to block some applications
       for a given user (Thanks also to Tiago Marques from Caixa Magica).
       Use the new tab for it.

netprofile

     * Add support for custom services: you can now add whatever service
       you need to be managed by netprofile.

          For more info see this blog post by Eugeni Dodonov.

Mandriva Directory Server

   New release of MDS (Mandriva Directory Server).
     * New userquota module (Glen Ogilvie) to set disk and network quota
       for users.
     * New bulkimport mode (Glen Ogilvie) to do massive import/update
       users from a CSV file.
     * New sshlpk module to manage OpenSSH LDAP public keys.
     * Many updates in translations (French, German, Spanish, Brazilian
       Portuguese).

Desktop environments

GNOME

     * Ia-Ora GTK+ theme improvements:
          + Tooltips are now a little bigger, have rounded-corners and if
            you are running with a compositing manager (Compiz, Mutter,
            Metacity with compositing enabled), they become a bit
            translucent too.
          + Tooltips placement has been improved and should try to avoid
            hiding the widgets they describe.
          + Windows can now be dragged not only from window title (in
            Metacity or Compiz), but also from window menubar. This is not
            very useful for Ia-Ora theme but other themes are now trying
            to remove the distinction between window title and menubar, so
            it might help.
          + mnemonics are now hidden by default, unless you start pressing
            "Alt" key. It is to help reducing clutter on screen.
          + GNOME Panel is now using more space between icons for
            launchers and status icons.

   GNOME 2.30.1, which includes (non exhaustive list):
     * Many Epiphany improvements: Webkit page cache enabled, Youtube
       movie extension available (no flash required), infobar for saving
       username/password in GNOME keyring, support for GZIP compressed
       pages.
     * Gnome Activity Journal, a tool which uses Zeitgeist to let you
       browse through the documents you recently worked on, is now
       available in Mandriva.
     * Evolution opens attachments read-only to prevent accidentally
       loosing modification you might make.
     * Vinagre now supports tunnelling VNC connections over SSH.
     * GNOME Color Manager, a utility to set up colour profiles for your
       monitor, is now packaged in Mandriva Cooker.
     * Many changes have been implemented in Nautilus before GNOME 3.0
       release. Nautilus will then become a file manager only and will not
       manage desktop anymore. So file management functionalities have
       been improved and an optional split view has been added fore more
       convenience.
     * You can now configure a background per monitor on a multi-monitor
       setup.
     * Tracker has replaced Beagle as the document search engine.
     * Packagekit service is now available for applications, including
       file-roller (for e.g. installing unzip or unrar utilities when
       needed).
     * Rewritten GDM 2.30.2 is now used as the default GNOME display
       manager. Please check 2010 Spring Errata as this new version
       doesn't support all the features from the old 2.20 series. You can
       still install 2.20 gdm, by using the gdm-220 package.

   Various news:
     * udisks and gnome-disk-utility are now used by GNOME tools,
       replacing HAL, for disk handling.
     * There were further performance improvements in the GLib library.
     * LightsOff: A new GNOME game.
     * Improved IRC support for Empathy and support for Facebook chat,
       using XMPP standard protocol.
     * Seed supported by more and more applications.
     * GtkBuilder is one of the new APIs used for applications.
     * Cheese: the webcam application has been split into different
       libraries, making it easier for other applications to integrate
       webcam functionality (like avatar choosers in instant messaging
       applications).
     * A preview of GNOME-Shell (2.29.1), which will be part of GNOME 3,
       is now available. You should use "GNOME3Preview" session to test
       GNOME-Shell (and you need 3D support from your graphics card).
       GNOME-Shell is available on One live-CD, GNOME edition. You will
       need to install the live CD if you want to evaluate GNOME-Shell.

KDE

     * KDE 4.4.3 (final release) has had a number of improvements since
       4.3.x:
          + The brand new Window Tabbing, this enables you to group
            windows together, which makes handling large numbers of
            application windows easier as you can group the relevant ones,
            according to your work flow, together
          + Possible crashes in Plasma, Dolphin and Okular have been fixed
          + A performance problem in KMail when sending emails has been
            fixed
          + Numerous fixes in Konsole, KDE's terminal emulator, among them
            two possible crashers in session management
          + Flash plugin support in KHTML has been enhanced to work with
            newest Youtube skins
          + Fixes for Case-sensitivity when renaming in KIO, KDE's
            network-transparent I/O library
          + Microblog applet now shows the correct time in the timeline
          + The audioplayer KRunner plugin has been fixed to not freeze
            the KRunner UI
          + Backported fixes / improvements for kdegraphics from KDE trunk
          + Backported fixes / improvements for Nepomuk from KDE trunk
          + Better plymouth support/integration in KDM
          + The GetHotNewStuff interface in KDE4 has been further improved
            to make it easier to install available third party content
          + KGet now has support for digital signature checking and
            downloading files from multiple sources
          + Gwenview now includes an easy to use photo import tool

     * Application Launcher Menu tool tips: now if the Application
       Launcher Menu "Format" is set to "Name Only" or "Description Only"
       a tool tip will appear when hovering over a menu entry displaying
       the other component (e.g. with "Name Only" the tool tip will
       display the Description and vice versa).
     * KDM:
          + KDM in Mandriva now automatically triggers XFdrake, the X
            server configuration tool in Mandriva, if the X server can't
            be started normally allowing users to easily reconfigure their
            display configuration.
          + To make the KDM greeter, the login screen, use the colours of
            each Mandriva edition (Free, One, Powerpack and Flash)
            correctly, the kdm configuration file kdmrc has been moved to
            each *-kde4-config sub-package; so now kdmrc will be in
            /var/lib/mandriva/kde4-profiles/{free,one,powerpack,flash}/sha
            re/config/kdm/.
          + Fingerprint support has been added to KDM.

     * Ia-Ora KDE theme:
          + Multiple crash fixes
          + Various fixes / improvements regrading themes colours and list
            view alternative background colours
          + Window tabbing support: Now IaOra-KDE supports window tabbing,
            i.e. several windows can be grouped together, like what the
            Oxygen style can do

   Around KDE:
     * Qt, The current version in 2010.1 is the latest stable version,
       4.6.2.

     * Nepomuk now uses Virtuoso as its back-end to store data, which
       should give faster tagging and indexing.
          + Nepomuk have Timeline support in Dolphin, which allows to see
            the new tags as a function of the modification date.
          + Ginkgo is a new graphical front-end for managing data
            semantically. Ginkgo lets you create and explore links between
            your personal data such as e-mails, contacts, files, Web
            pages. It harnesses the Nepomuk framework.

     * Amarok 2.3.1: improved podcast support, a newly designed toolbar
       and the possiblity of automatically using a USB mass storage device
       for the collection when it's connected.

     * FFmpegThumbs: a new KDE4 video preview/thumbnailer implementation,
       based on FFmpegThumbnailer, it's very light on resources and works
       for all video file types supported by FFmpeg.

     * KTorrent 4.0: redesigned GUI for better ergonomy.

     * Digikam and kipi-plugins 1.3.0, the latest version, are available
       in the official repositories.

     * The KDE Webkit based browser reKonq was updated to version 0.4
       which includes kwallet support, AdBlock support, and many more
       improvements/features.

     * Choqok a KDE micro-blogging client for Twitter and identi.ca is
       packaged and ready to install.

     * The KDE 4 port of KmyMoney now reached beta status and is available
       in the official repositories.

Desktop applications

     * Firefox 3.6.3. This brand new version comes with lots of
       improvements in performance. You will find also some new
       functionalities to improve global ergonomy:
          + Tab previews: to activate this new feature, open about:config
            in your browser and look for browser.CtrlTab.previews
            parameter.
          + Support for Persona themes.
          + More feedback information like report when an installed
            plug-in is out of date.
          + For an overview of Firefox 3.6 features, you can check this
            Ars Technica article.
          + KDE4 Integration, now under KDE4, Firefox uses the KDE file
            chooser, and respects the KDE file type association settings.

     * OpenOffice.org 3.2: startup speed has been improved a lot. Some
       improvements also in OpenXML files import and basic docx file
       export.
     * System-config-printer 1.2.0 is now Hal Free and uses Udev for
       printer auto-detection.
     * Gutenprint 5.2.5 adds support for many new Epson printers.
     * Chromium (The open source browser on which Google Chrome is based)
       is available in the official repositories. It's, for now, available
       only for both i586 and x86_64 in the contrib repositories.
     * Opera: The Opera browser is now available in the official Non-free
       repository.
     * Gnash 0.8.7 snapshot.
     * xine-lib 1.2 with support for VDPAU for hardware accelerated
       rendering of high definition video is now available.
     * Clementine player has been packaged for Mandriva. This is a port of
       Amarok 1.4 to QT4, for people who prefer the older Amarok GUI.
     * Deluge 1.2.3 (final) is now available in Cooker. It has a rewritten
       web UI and performance improvements.
     * XBMC: The popular media centre software is now available in the
       official repositories. Ideal for setting up a Home Theatre PC
       (HTPC) with Mandriva!
     * Transmission 1.92 is now available. It adds support for magnet
       links and trackerless torrents and has many other improvements.
     * qBittorrent, a light weight but feature-full Qt-based BitTorrent
       client is available in the official repositories.
     * Skrooge 0.7.0: New versions of the personal finances management
       applications Skrooge and Homebank were released, this brings many
       new features and improvements, mostly focusing on import and
       export. Homebank 4.2.1 brings similar improvements with a new trend
       time reports.
     * libgpod 0.7.93 was released and this version brings iPhone, iPod
       Touch and iPod Nano 5G support for gtkpod, Rhythmbox and Amarok.
     * Avant Window Navigator 4.0, the latest stable version, is now
       available in the official repositories along with the latest
       awn-extras.
     * Video editors updates:
          + Lives 1.3.2 brings PulseAudio support, many improvements to
            multi-track mode, a startup wizard for new users, some new
            real-time transitions and improved performance.
          + Kdenlive 0.7.7.1 now includes colour themes, an improved
            titler and a few other new features.
          + The OpenShot video editor was imported in Mandriva recently.
            The package is now at version 1.1.3.

     * Major new version 2.0.0 of the Bluefish web editor. It adds
       autocompletion for HTML, CSS and PHP, inline help, inline spell
       checking, a character map, upload/download synchronization with
       remote web sites, automatic document recovery and more.

Educational and scientific applications

   Many educational and scientific applications were introduced and
   improved Mandriva 2010.1. Among some of such applications it is
   possible to mention:
     * Sagemath. A free open-source mathematics software system licensed
       under the GPL, which combines the power of many existing
       open-source packages into a common Python-based interface, was
       fully integrated in Mandriva 2010.1
     * Salome. An open-source software that provides a generic platform
       for Pre- and Post-Processing for numerical simulation was also
       introduced in Mandriva 2010.1 distribution.
     * Invesalius. InVesalius generates 3D anatomical models based on a
       sequence of 2D DICOM files acquired using CT or MRI equipments.
     * Root. A framework for data processing, born at CERN, at the heart
       of the research on high-energy physics.
     * Axiom. A general purpose Computer Algebra system, which defines a
       strongly typed, mathematically correct type hierarchy and has a
       programming language and a built-in compiler.
     * Tachyon. Tachyon is a parallel ray tracing library, for use on
       distributed memory parallel computers, shared memory computers, and
       clusters of workstations. Tachyon supports MPI for distributed
       memory parallel computers, threads for shared memory machines, and
       can support both simultaneously for clusters of shared memory
       machines. Tachyon has been selected for inclusion in the SPEC
       MPI2007 benchmark suite.
     * Jmol. An open-source Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D with
       features for chemicals, crystals, materials and biomolecules.
     * Singular. SINGULAR is a Computer Algebra system for polynomial
       computations with special emphasize on the needs of commutative
       algebra, algebraic geometry, singularity theory and polynomial
       system solving.
     * Gap. GAP is a system for computational discrete algebra, with
       particular emphasis on Computational Group Theory. GAP provides a
       programming language, a library of thousands of functions
       implementing algebraic algorithms written in the GAP language as
       well as large data libraries of algebraic objects.
     * Ecl. ECL (Embeddable Common-Lisp) is an interpreter of the
       Common-Lisp language as described in the X3J13 Ansi specification,
       featuring CLOS (Common-Lisp Object System), conditions, loops, etc,
       plus a translator to C, which can produce standalone executables.
     * Polybori. PolyBoRi is implemented as a C++ library for Polynomials
       over Boolean Rings, which provides high-level data types for
       Boolean polynomials. A python-interface yields extensible
       algorithms for computing Groebner bases over Boolean Rings.
     * Macaulay2. Macaulay 2 is a software system devoted to supporting
       research in algebraic geometry and commutative algebra, whose
       creation has been funded by the National Science Foundation since
       1992.
     * Linalg-linbox. LinBox is a C++ template library for exact,
       high-performance linear algebra computation with dense, sparse, and
       structured matrices over the integers and over finite fields.

X server

     * Imwheel has been removed from Mandriva distribution as it was
       getting really old and buggy. Please report any bugs you could have
       because of this.
     * Nouveau driver: it's now used as the default free driver for nVidia
       graphics cards instead of of the nv. Nouveau will bring Kernel Mode
       Setting support, 2D acceleration, and RandR 1.2 support (for easy
       multi-monitor setup).
     * Mesa 7.8: 3D support has been enabled for the ATI R600 and R700
       chipets (ATI Radeon HD 2000 and later), you can now enjoy 3D
       acceleration with the free ATI drivers.
     * Intel X11 driver version 2.11.0 is now included. Together with
       kernel 2.6.33 it brings video overlay support for more CPU
       efficient video playback.
     * X.org related packages have been updated to X.org release 7.5. Also
       included xserver version 1.7.7.
     * The free ATI driver has been updated to version 6.13. This version
       supports kernel-mode setting support (enabled by default in the TMB
       kernel) and adds support for some newer ATI cards.

Base system

     * HAL use has been removed from printing system now. Please report
       any trouble you may have in printers detection and daily work.
     * Linux kernel 2.6.33.4 release: Some noteworthy changes include: **
       The new Nouveau driver for nVidia graphics cards is now included in
       the kernel and is now used by default on Mandriva instead of the nv
       driver.
          + DRBD, the Distributed Replicated Block Device driver, which is
            useful on High Availability clusters is now included in the
            kernel.
          + There is a new experimental Compcache driver, which compresses
            part of the memory, effectively increasing the amount of
            memory you can use. Note that Mandriva does not yet include
            the user space tools to effectively use this.
          + The Anticipatory I/O scheduler was removed and there were the
            usual improvements to the default CFQ I/O scheduler.
          + Of course there are also many improvements to hardware
            support, such as a new driver for WIFI devices with the Ralink
            RT2800 and Realtek RTL8192U chipsets.
     * TMB kernel in Contrib uses the BFS process scheduler now, bringing
       improved responsiveness.
     * ntfs-3g driver 2010.03.06: Performance and timestamps fixes.
     * Glibc 2.11.1: many performance improvements. For example, binutils
       package now comes with STT_GNU_IFUNC support.
     * The GDB debugger was updated to version 7.1. Developers are excited
       about the process record and replay and reverse debugging features.
     * General build options: all packages are now linked with the -Wl,-O1
       linker options. This can improve start-up performance of
       applications linked with many libraries.
     * Dracut, a replacement for mkinitrd, has been improved to better
       integrate with Mandriva (but it is still experimental and does not
       replace mkinitrd by default) You can create a new initrd with
       Dracut by hand if you want, or start using it by default the next
       time you install a new kernel by running update-alternatives
       --config mkinitrd and selecting dracut.
     * Ruby 1.9.1 is now available in Contrib. This new version is much
       more faster than the previous Ruby 1.8 series.
     * USB/IP, a tool for using USB devices over the network, is now
       packaged in Cooker.
     * microcode_ctl package has been enhanced to automatically download
       the latest microcode for you CPU and now supports AMD CPUs. Intel
       microcode is also available from the new microcode package in
       non-free.
     * Python has been updated to the 2.6.5 release.

System administration

     * The Sysklogd system log daemon has been replaced by rsyslog.
       rsyslog is a very modern system logger with very active
       development. It includes advanced features such as storing logs in
       SQL databases, e-mail warnings on some log messages, support for
       sending syslog messages over TCP and many more.
     * Munin 1.4.4: better scalability, many new plug-ins for monitoring
       MySQL, PostgreSQL, Asterisk and others.
     * Spamassassin has been updated to version 3.3.1. There are new
       plug-ins and adaptations of the default scores for better spam
       detection. The rules now are in a separate spamassassin-rules
       package and by default sa-update is run on a daily basis to update
       them.
     * Monitoring tool Zabbix has been updated to new version 1.8.2. This
       release brings much improved performance and GUI.
     * Postfix 2.7.0 is now available, bringing improved performance in
       content filtering and address verification.
     * MySQL packages were reorganized a bit. The mysql-max package was
       dropped and its features were merged in the standard mysql
       packages. The clustered storage engine NDB was removed from the
       mysql package and is now available in the mysql-cluster package.
     * Zarafa groupware solution is now included in Mandriva (Community
       version).
     * This release of Mandriva Linux brings a fully-functional
       Network-Manager plugin, developed and maintained by Andrey
       Borzenkov from Mandriva community, which is able to use all
       features supported by the Mandriva Network Tools (drakx-net). Note
       that while drakx-net tools remain the official Mandriva network
       configuration utilities, this plugin allows users who are used to
       the Network-Manager and want to use it while having all
       Mandriva-specific features.

Internationalization

     * iBus has been included in contrib repository. We encourage input
       method users to try out this new input method framework, and report
       bugs to bugzilla.

